---
title: '關於設計模式(design pattern)'
date: 2018-06-07 22:36:41
tags: [軟體工程,設計模式]
---

### 前言
&emsp;&emsp;設計模式最早是出自於四人幫(Gang of Four)撰寫的一本書:[Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software](https://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E8%AE%BE%E8%AE%A1%E6%A8%A1%E5%BC%8F%EF%BC%9A%E5%8F%AF%E5%A4%8D%E7%94%A8%E9%9D%A2%E5%90%91%E5%AF%B9%E8%B1%A1%E8%BD%AF%E4%BB%B6%E7%9A%84%E5%9F%BA%E7%A1%80)。書中提到的設計模式可以分成3大類型，一共23個模式。

<!-- more --> 

### 創建類型 Creational Patterns

1. **Abstract Factory**: Provide an interface for creating families of related or dependent objects without specifying their concrete classes.
2. **Builder**: Separate the construction of a complex object from its representation so that the same construction process can create different representations.
3. **Factory Method**: Define an interface for creating an object, but let subclasses decide which class to instantiate. Factory Method lets a class defer instantiation to subclasses.
4. **Prototype**: Specify the kinds of objects to create using a prototypical instance, and create new objects by copying this prototype.
5. **Singleton**: Ensure a class only has one instance, and provide a global point of access to it.

### 結構類型 Structural Patterns

1. **Adapter**: Convert the interface of a class into another interface clients expect. Adapter lets classes work together that couldn’t otherwise because of incompatible interfaces.
2. **Bridge**: Decouple an abstraction from its implementation so that the two can vary independently.
3. **Composite**: Compose objects into tree structures to represent part-whole hierarchies. Composite lets clients treat individual objects and compositions of objects uniformly.
4. **Decorator**: Attach additional responsibilities to an object dynamically. Decorators provide a flexible alternative to subclassing for extending functionality.
5. **Facade**: Provide a unified interface to a set of interfaces in a subsystem. Façade defines a higher-level interface that makes the subsystem easier to use.
6. **Flyweight**: Use sharing to support large numbers of fine-grained objects efficiently.
7. **Proxy**: Provide a surrogate or placeholder for another object to control access to it.

### 行為類型 Behavioral Patterns

1. **Chain of Responsibility**: Avoid coupling the sender of a request to its receiver by giving more than one objet a change to handle the request. Chain the receiving objects and pass the request along the chain until an object handles it.
2. **Command**: Encapsulate a request as an object, thereby letting you parameterize clients with different requests, queue or log requests, and support undoable operations.
3. **Interpreter**: Given a language, define a representation for its grammar along with an interpreter that uses the representation to interpret sentences in the language.
4. **Iterator**: Provide a way to access the elements of an aggregate object sequentially without exposing its underlying representation.
5. **Mediator**: Define an object that encapsulates how a set of objects interact. Mediator promotes loose coupling by keeping objects from referring to each other explicitly, and it lets you vary their interaction independently.
6. **Memento**: Without violating encapsulation, capture and externalize an object’s internal state so that the object can be restored to this state later.
7. **Observer**: Define a one-to-many dependency between objects so that when one object changes state, all its dependents are notified and updated automatically.
8. **State**: Allow an object to alter its behavior when tis internal state changes. The object will appear to change its class.
9. **Strategy**: Define a family of algorithms, encapsulate each one, and make them interchangeable. Strategy lets the algorithm vary independently from clients that use it.
10. **Template Method**: Define the skeleton of an algorithm in an operation, deferring some steps to subclasses. Template Method lets subclasses redefine certain steps of an algorithm without changing the algorithm’s structure.
11. **Visitor**: Represent an operation to be performed on the elements of an object structure. Visitor lets you define a new operation without changing the classes of the elements on which it operates.

### 參考資料

- http://teddy-chen-tw.blogspot.com/2012/10/creational-patterns.html
- http://teddy-chen-tw.blogspot.com/2012/11/structural-patterns.html
- http://teddy-chen-tw.blogspot.com/2013/03/behavioral-patterns.html

### 心得

Teddy老師的部落格寫得真的很棒，對於想學習軟體工程的新手或中手都有很大的幫助。